Hello there. In this video, we're going to look at the motivation for concurrency. Or, in other words,
why is concurrency considered important?
Concurrency first appeared on mainframes in the 1960s, but it was not until the 1990s before the world
of workstations and personal computers began to regard it as an important technology.
And there were four main reasons why that happened at that particular time.
These were all developments in the computer world, which were more or less happening at the same time.
The first one was the rise of the Internet.
Previously, a server might handle, maybe a few hundred clients
if it was really busy. Now, you could have a server that might have 100,000 or maybe even a million simultaneous
clients or more. Clearly, the amount of work that a server could do at any one time, its throughput, needed
to increase dramatically and threading was one of the techniques that was used to deliver that.
The second one was the rise of Windows. Users on personal computers could now access several running
programs at the same time, and they expected to be able to interact with them even if the programs
were busy doing something else.
So this means that Windows programs had to be able to do more than one thing at a time, and that means
multi threading. The third one.
was the rise of games and multimedia.
These typically involve lots of mathematical computations.
If the frame rate is too low, the game will not play smoothly.
The video will look jerky, or have bits missing, and the audio will have clicks and pops.
And the final event was the rise of multicore processors.
We now had computers which had several processors, and we wanted programs which could take full
advantage of this.
So let's look at each of these in a bit more detail. Traditionally with servers, you would have everything
done as a single process.
So there would be a single process, which was the server, and there would be other processes which are
child processes.
Every time the server received a client connection, it would start up a new process, a new child process,
and that child process would deal with the clients while the server carried on and waited
for the next connection.
These processes are all separate running applications with their own address space.
There is no direct communication between them.
If you want the server to be able to send some data to a client, you would need to put in a communication
channel.
These interprocess communication channels have overhead and there is also a certain amount of overhead
from creating a process.
It's not too bad on Unix systems, but on Windows systems, it's slow and resource intensive.
So all this process creation and adding interprocess communication will increase overhead, and that will
reduce the scalability and the amount of work that servers can do.
Separation of concerns. Let's imagine you are editing a large document and you are using a single threaded program.
You start some action which is going to take a long time to complete.
You could be compiling an index for the document.
You could be calculating where the page numbers go, or you could even - and we are still in the 1990s, remember -
you could even be saving to a floppy disk!
Clunk, clunk, clunk-clunk!
While that's happening,
The user interface of the program will be completely unresponsive.
You can click on it with your mouse, you can press keys, you can do everything,
and it'll completely ignore you. If you switch to another application which covers up the program
and then eventually you come back to the program, the window will have gone.
You just get a grey box, possibly with an hourglass.
And the reason for that is that the program can only do one thing at a time, which is performing the
action that you asked it to perform.
It cannot respond to GUI events, such as being told "someone has clicked a mouse" or "someone has pressed this key",
"you've got to redraw yourself", because it is busy performing the action.
All these events are stuck in a queue.
Then finally, the action will end.
The program will read all the events off the queue and process them instantly.
Then all sorts of weird things will happen,
depending on what you did. You might find out that you have erased your document or overwritten it with
a load of garbage and saved it. Generally not desirable.
With fast numerical computation, typically, if you were worried about this, you were a scientist
or similar, you worked at a university or a research institution and you had persuaded your employers
to buy you and your colleagues a nice new toy, which has lots of processors which are specially wired
up so that they could coordinate with each other.
You wrote a program using a special language, maybe a parallel version of Fortran or Occam, and
then this would divide up your program and run different parts of it on different processors at the same
time.
So that would achieve parallel processing.
So instead of taking three months, your simulation might take three weeks.
Nowadays we have hardware which supports parallel programming.
You can buy a normal computer, or even a phone, which will do that.
So it doesn't cost very much.
It's supported by standard programming languages which have now got features for parallel processing
C++ has some, which we will look at later.
And finally, you do not have to fight with your colleagues to actually get to run your program.
Effective use of hardware. By the time we got to the 1990s, designers at companies like Intel and
AMD had spent a couple of decades making chips that were bigger and bigger and more and more complicated
and could do more and more things faster and faster.
They were now starting to be affected by the limits imposed by the laws of physics. In particular,
the one which says nothing can travel faster than the speed of light.
In practice, electrons can move through silicon at maybe five or 10 percent of the speed of light.
If your processor cycle time is one nanosecond, that might mean
a quarter of an inch, half a centimetre, which is a very long way, actually, but if your chip is three
inches or five centimetres across, it's going to take a long time just for an electron to go from one
side of the processor chip to the other.
And that's going to slow down the rate at which data can move around and instructions can be processed.
The other problem is the heat generated.
While the electrons move through silicon, they generate heat and the amount of heat was getting bigger
and bigger.
If you extrapolate it, you eventually get to things like the temperature of molten steel or the surface
of the sun.
And that's really not something that you want to have sitting on your desk!
So they abandoned the idea of having one mega processor and instead they started designing chips
which had several smaller processor cores.
If you have a single threaded program, it can only run on one core, or maybe one core at a time, if it
gets switched around between cores. If you have a computer with 16 or eight or four cores, then you are
obviously not making the full use of the system potential.
If you have a computer which only runs one program and it only uses one core, then you are only using
a small fraction of the system's power.
So concurrency gives our programs the ability to do more than one thing at the same time. In the case
of servers, we can have a child which is running as a thread inside the server process.
So we don't need to create a new process every time we get a new connection.
And because they are all part of the same process, they have the same address space so they can directly
access data if they choose to share it.
So that removes all the overhead connected with interprocess communication and process creation.
It does add overhead from thread creation and safely sharing data.
But that's a different question.
For separation of concerns, we can write a program which is able to respond to GUI events promptly
while it continues to perform a long running task, and we can do that by providing separate threads
for the GUI and the task.
With numerical computation and using the hardware, we can write programs which can execute on different
cores at the same time.
So concurrency addresses all these problems.
It doesn't completely solve things because it adds some problems of its own, but it is progress.
And finally, just one thing to clear up, there is a small but important difference between concurrency
and parallelism.
Concurrency means we have different tasks which are running at the same time.
So these are things which represent different concepts in the program.
For example, if we have a server and a child, those are different concepts.
So that would be concurrency.
Processing GUI events and calculating an index or page numbers are conceptually different tasks.
So if they run at the same time, they are concurrent.
If the tasks are the same, then that is parallelism.
So parallelism means that we have the same tasks running at the same time.
If we take a numerical computation and run different parts of it on different cores at the same time.
So we are doing the same addition or multiplication or whatever on different cores at the same time.
That would be an example of parallelism.
Okay, that's it.
I'll see you next time.